::: {itemprop="articleBody"}
::: {.attachmentsContainer}
::: {#attachmentsList_com_content_default_621 .attachmentsList}
:::
:::

*![photo of accessible boat
slip](/images/guidelines_standards/Recreation_Facilities/Recreation_Facilities/boating-guide/p2boat.jpg){width="175"
height="202"}\"Whenever any barrier stands between you and the full
rights and dignity of citizenship, we must work to remove it, in the
name of simple decency and justice.The promise of the ADA\...has enabled
people with disabilities to enjoy much greater access to a wide range of
affordable travel, recreational opportunities and life-enriching
services."*

> *President George W. Bush, New Freedom Initiative, February 1, 2001*

The recreation facility guidelines described in this guide focus on
newly designed or newly constructed and altered boating facilities.
Other provisions contained in ADAAG address elements commonly found at a
boating facility, such as accessible vehicle parking spaces, exterior
accessible routes, and toilet and bathing facilities. ADAAG addresses
only the built environment (structures and grounds). The guidelines do
not address operational issues of a facility. Questions regarding
operational issues should be directed to the Department of Justice,
1-800-514-0301 or 1-800-514-0383 (TTY).

Recreational boating facilities can include fixed and floating
facilities. Facilities can vary in size from one boat slip (for example,
at a small campground facility) to several thousand slips, and can
handle boats ranging in size from small canoes to large sailboats and
powerboats. Facilities may be located in the same waterfront area or
even in the same site (such as a State park with a large lake) and
include marinas, launching facilities, piers, and docks that are
designed for recreational use.

These guidelines do not cover the design of passenger vessels or ferry
docks, and do not address access on and off passenger vessels. These
issues will be addressed in future rulemaking for passenger vessels.
:::

::: {itemprop="articleBody"}
::: {.attachmentsContainer}
::: {#attachmentsList_com_content_default_622 .attachmentsList}
:::
:::

![photo of
gangway](/images/guidelines_standards/Recreation_Facilities/Recreation_Facilities/p5boat.jpg){width="277"
height="180"}ADAAG requires that at least one accessible route connect
accessible buildings, facilities, elements, and spaces on a site.
Accessible boat slips, accessible boarding piers at boat launch
ramps,and other accessible spaces and elements within a boating facility
must also be connected by an accessible route. The accessible route must
comply with ADAAG provisions for the location, width (minimum of 36
inches), passing space,head room, surface, slope (maximum of 1:12 or
8.33%), changes in level, doors, egress, and areas of rescue assistance,
unless otherwise modified by specific provisions outlined in this guide.

**Gangways**\
A gangway is a variable-sloped pedestrian walkway linking a fixed
structure or land with a floating structure. Where gangways are provided
as part of accessible routes to connect accessible boat slips on
floating piers, the following exceptions to the ADAAG accessible route
provisions have been included in the guidelines to deal with the varying
water level changes and other factors in this dynamic environment.
Designers and operators should note that there are no exceptions to the
accessible route requirements where the accessible route connects fixed
piers to land or other fixed structures.

![illustration of accessible gangway serving accessible boat slips in a
large
facility](/images/guidelines_standards/Recreation_Facilities/Recreation_Facilities/boating-guide/page-6.jpg)

**Gangway Slope and Rise Exceptions**\
Gangways designed for the least possible slope will provide more
independent access for persons with disabilities. As a minimum however,
gangways must be designed to provide for a maximum 1:12 (8.33%) slope
but are not required to be longer than 80 feet in length. For example,
if the vertical distance between where the gangway departs the landside
connection and the elevation of the pier surface at the lowest water
level is 10 feet, the gangway would have to be at least 80 feet long. As
water levels rise and fall, gangway slopes also rise and fall. At times,
this gangway slope may be less than 1:20 (5%) and at other times it may
be more than 1:12 (8.33%). In smaller facilities with less than 25 boat
slips, the slope of the gangway may exceed 1:12 (8.33%), if the gangway
is at least 30 feet long.

The maximum rise requirements in ADAAG do not apply to gangways. As a
result, no intermediate landings on the gangways are required and
gangways may be any length.

The gangway slope and rise exceptions do not apply to other sloped
walking surfaces that may be part of the accessible route. For example,
where a non-gangway sloped walking surface greater than 1:20 (5%) is
provided as part of an accessible route connecting accessible spaces of
a boating facility, it must comply with ADAAG slope and rise
requirements. This would include a ramp connecting a fixed pier or a
float with fixed switchback ramps.

![illustration of non-gangway sloped walking surface meeting ADAAG
requirements](/images/guidelines_standards/Recreation_Facilities/Recreation_Facilities/boating-guide/page-7.jpg)

![photo of gangway connecting floating
pier](/images/guidelines_standards/Recreation_Facilities/Recreation_Facilities/boating-guide/page-8_hi.jpg)**Gangway
Alterations**\
Gangways on existing boating facilities may be repaired or replaced
without triggering the requirement to increase the gangway length.
However, if the areas altered contain primary functions (such as a boat
slip or boat dock), existing gangways are considered part of the path of
travel to the altered primary function area and must be made accessible,
if the cost to do so is not disproportionate. The Department of Justice
has determined that it is not disproportionate to spend up to an
additional 20 percent of the overall costs of alterations to the primary
function areas to make the path of travel accessible.![illustration of
transition
plates](/images/guidelines_standards/Recreation_Facilities/Recreation_Facilities/boating-guide/page-8_low.jpg)

**Transition Plates**\
Transition plates are sloping pedestrian walking surfaces located at the
end of a gangway. Gangways are not required to have landings at the end,
if transition plates are provided. If the slope of a transition plate is
greater than 1:20 (5%), the transition plate must have a landing at the
non-gangway end of the transition plate and comply with other ADAAG ramp
requirements.

**Handrail Extensions**\
ADAAG addresses handrail height, diameter, and extensions provided to
the end of the gangway. Other specifications regarding vertical supports
are not addressed by ADDAG, but may be addressed in local building
codes. Handrail extensions are not required where gangways and
transition plates connect and both are provided with handrails. ADAAG
does not require handrails on sloped surfaces that have a rise of less
than 6 inches or a projection less than 72 inches, or a slope of 1:20
(5%) or less. Where handrail extensions are provided, they do not need
to be parallel with the ground or floor surface, since the surface may
be moving due to water conditions.

**Cross Slope**\
The cross slopes of gangways, transition plates and floating piers that
are part of an accessible route must be designed and constructed to not
exceed a maximum of 2 percent (1:50). Gangways and piers that are part
of an accessible route are expected to be designed and constructed to
meet the 2 percent requirement. Once placed in the water, measurements,
absent live loads, are to be made from a static condition (i.e., absence
of movement that results from wind, waves, etc.). Where floating piers
are grounded out due to low water conditions, slope requirements would
not apply.

**Elevators and Platform Lifts**\
In addition to regular elevators, limited use/limited application
elevators (smaller, slower elevators used for low-traffic, low-rise
facilities) or platform lifts that comply with ADAAG may be used instead
of gangways as part of an accessible route connecting floating piers.
:::

::: {itemprop="articleBody"}
::: {.attachmentsContainer}
::: {#attachmentsList_com_content_default_623 .attachmentsList}
:::
:::

Â 

  Total Boat Slips in Facility             Minimum Accessible Slips
  ------------------------------ ---------------------------------------------
  1 to 25                                              1
  26 to 50                                             2
  51 to 100                                            3
  101 to 150                                           4
  151 to 300                                           5
  301 to 400                                           6
  401 to 500                                           7
  501 to 600                                           8
  601 to 700                                           9
  701 to 800                                          10
  801 to 900                                          11
  901 to 1000                                         12
  1001 and over                   12, plus 1 for each 100 or fraction thereof

  : Number of Accessible Boat Slips Required

A boat slip is the portion of a pier, main pier, finger pier, or float
where a boat is berthed or moored, or used for embarking or
disembarking. Where boat slips are provided, the number of boat slips
required to be accessible must comply with the table shown to the right.
In these guidelines, boarding piers that are not part of boat launch
ramps are also classified as boat slips. For purposes of these
guidelines, piers not typically thought of as providing boat slips where
boats can be moored, such as a fuel pier, are also included in
determining the total number of slips at the facility.

![illustration of required clear space for 60 foot
pier](/images/guidelines_standards/Recreation_Facilities/Recreation_Facilities/page-10.jpg){width="225"
height="196"}

If boat slips at a facility are not identified or demarcated by length,
each 40 feet of boat slip edge along the perimeter of a pier will be
counted as one boat slip. For example, a new boating facility will
provide a single 60-foot pier with boats moored parallel to the pier on
both sides. The pier has 120 feet of boat slip edge, which equates to
three boat slips. According to the table, one slip must be accessible,
with clear pier space at least 40 feet long and a minimum width of 60
inches. In this case, the width of the pier is not considered when
totaling the amount of boat slip edge, since it is not designed for
mooring. Another new boating facility plans to provide a single pier
that is 25 feet long and 3 feet wide and will allow boats to moor on
both sides and on one end. The pier has 53 feet of boat slip edge, which
equates to two boat slips. According to the table, one slip must be
accessible, and the width of the pier must be increased to a minimum of
60 inches.

**Dispersion**\
Accessible boat slips must be dispersed throughout the various types of
slips a facility provides, but a facility does not have to provide more
accessible boat slips than required in the table. Accessible slips may
be grouped on one pier if the requirement for different types of slips
is met. Types could include shallow-water or deep water; transient or
longer-term lease; covered or uncovered; and whether slips are equipped
with features such as telephone, water, electricity, or cable
connections.

![illustration of pier
clearance](/images/guidelines_standards/Recreation_Facilities/Recreation_Facilities/page-11.jpg){width="308"
height="231"}Accessible boat slips do not need to be marked and are not
reserved in the same way as accessible vehicle parking spaces. For
example, facilities should hold the accessible slips open for persons
with disabilities until all other slips are filled. At that point, the
slip may be made available for general use. For seasonal slip holders,
accessible slips should be held until the expiration period for slip
contracts has expired. Marina operators may choose to make information
regarding accessible boat slips available in promotional material or a
facility guide. Ensuring that accessible slips are available to persons
with disabilities is an operational issue and operators should contact
the Department of Justice for further information.

![photo of woman in wheelchair on accessible finger
pier](/images/guidelines_standards/Recreation_Facilities/Recreation_Facilities/chairdock1.jpg){width="200"
height="216"}**Accessible Boat Slips**\
Accessible boat slips must have clear pier space at least 60 inches wide
and as long as the slip. Providing more than 60 inches wide clear space
will improve safety for people with disabilities, especially on floating
piers. This space is the minimum necessary for individuals with
disabilities to have sufficient space adjacent to their boat slip to use
a chair lift or transfer device for getting on or off their vessel and
provide a turning space for changing directions. Every 10 feet of linear
pier edge serving the accessible slips must have at least one continuous
clear opening that is at least 60 inches wide. There are three
exceptions:

-   The width of the clear pier space may be 36 inches wide for a length
    of 24 inches, as long as multiple 36-inch segments are separated by
    segments that are 60 inches minimum clear in width and 60 inches
    minimum clear in length, and the clear openings are at least 60
    inches deep.

-   Edge protection is not required, but if provided, it can be 4 inches
    high maximum and 2 inches deep maximum at the continuous clear
    openings.![illustration of accessible finger
    piers](/images/guidelines_standards/Recreation_Facilities/Recreation_Facilities/page-13hi.jpg){width="320"
    height="219"}

Â 

-   In alterations, facilities with finger piers must have at least one
    accessible finger pier, which is the length of the boat slip and a
    minimum of 60 inches wide. Other accessible slips can be located
    perpendicular to the end of the pier with clearance extending the
    width of the slip. In facilities without finger piers, at least one
    accessible slip must be parallel to the pier and be a minimum of 60
    inches wide.

Cleats and other boat securement devices at accessible slips do not have
to comply with ADAAG reach range requirements. However, clear space must
be provided at each securement device and each device must be located on
an accessible route. This reach range exception does not apply to other
controls and operating mechanisms such as hose bibbs, water supply
hoses, outlets for electrical power, telephones, or cable TV.

![illustration of pier clearance space
reduction](/images/guidelines_standards/Recreation_Facilities/Recreation_Facilities/page-12_hi.jpg){width="291"
height="274"}
:::

![illustration of edge protection at
pier](/images/guidelines_standards/Recreation_Facilities/Recreation_Facilities/page-12_low.jpg){width="207"
height="190"}

![illustration of forward and side reach
ranges](/images/guidelines_standards/Recreation_Facilities/Recreation_Facilities/page-13_low.jpg){width="250"
height="355"}

::: {itemprop="articleBody"}
::: {.attachmentsContainer}
::: {#attachmentsList_com_content_default_624 .attachmentsList}
:::
:::

A boarding pier (sometimes called a courtesy pier or a launch dock) is
the part of a pier where a boat is temporarily moored for embarking and
disembarking. A boat launch ramp is a sloped surface designed for
launching and retrieving trailered boats and other watercraft to and
from a body of water. The provisions for boarding piers cover only those
that are associated with boat launch ramps. Boarding piers that are not
part of a boat launch ramp are classified as "boat slips" for purposes
of these guidelines.

If boarding piers at boat launch ramps are provided, at least 5 percent
but not less than one, must comply with these guidelines and be served
by an accessible route. The exceptions for gangways, previously
described above, may be applied to boarding piers (see Accessible
Routes).

In addition, gangways connecting floating boarding piers may exceed the
maximum slope specified in the guidelines, if the total length of the
gangway is at least 30 feet.

ADAAG ramp requirements do not apply to the portion of the accessible
route serving a floating boarding pier or skid pier if it is located
within a boat launch ramp. For example, a facility provides a chain of
floats on a launch ramp to be used as an accessible boarding pier. At
high water, the entire chain is floating and a transition plate connects
the first float to the surface of the launch ramp.As the water level
decreases, segments of the chain rest on the launch ramp surface,
matching the slope of the launch ramp. An accessible route must serve
the last float because it would function as the boarding pier at the
lowest water level, before it possibly grounded out. Because the entire
chain also functions as a boarding pier, it must comply with all ADAAG
provisions, including the 60-inch minimum clear pier width provision.

Another facility provides a non-floating boarding pier that is supported
by piles and divides a launch area into two launch ramps. An accessible
route must connect the boarding pier with other accessible buildings,
facilities, elements and spaces on the site. Although the boarding pier
is located within a launch ramp, because the pier is not a floating pier
or a skid pier, no exceptions apply. To comply with ADAAG, the
accessible route could run down between the two launch ramps. Or, the
fixed boarding pier could be relocated to the side of one of the launch
ramps, which would allow the slope of the launch ramps to remain
unchanged since the accessible route would run outside the launch ramps.

**Boarding Pier Clearances**\
The entire length of accessible boarding piers must comply with the same
technical provisions that apply to boat slips. There is no minimum
length for the pier. However, the accessible boarding pier should be at
least as long as other piers provided at the facility. If no other
boarding pier is provided,it should be at least as long as what would
have been provided if no access requirements applied. For example, at a
launch ramp, if a 20-foot accessible boarding pier is provided, the
entire 20 feet must comply with the pier clearance requirements. If a
60-foot accessible boarding pier is provided, the entire 60 feet must
comply with the pier clearance requirements.

**Launch Ramps Without Boarding Piers**![photo of launch ramp without
boarding
pier](/images/guidelines_standards/Recreation_Facilities/Recreation_Facilities/boating-guide/page-16.jpg)There
are no specific provisions that address access to launch ramps without
boarding piers. The Department of Justice advises that if there are no
applicable scoping requirements (i.e., how many features must be
accessible), then a reasonable number, but at least one, must be
accessible. It is recommended that an accessible route serve at least
one launch ramp. The portion of the accessible route located within the
launch ramp is not required to comply with the slope requirements for
accessible routes.
:::

::: {itemprop="articleBody"}
::: {.attachmentsContainer}
::: {#attachmentsList_com_content_default_1814 .attachmentsList}
:::
:::

This table highlights the sections of the ADA and ABA Accessibility
Standards discussed in the boating facilities guide.

Â 

  ----------------------------------------------------------- --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Â                                                             Â [ADA Standards](/guidelines-and-standards/buildings-and-sites/about-the-ada-standards/ada-standards)\*   [ABA Standards](/guidelines-and-standards/buildings-and-sites/about-the-aba-standards/aba-standards)Â 
  **Definitions**                                                                                              Â 106.5                                                                                                   F106.5Â 
  Alteration                                                                                                   Â 106.5                                                                                                   F106.5
  Boarding Pier                                                                                                 106.5                                                                                                   F106.5
  Boat Launch Ramp                                                                                             Â 106.5                                                                                                   F106.5Â 
  Boat Slip                                                                                                     106.5                                                                                                   F106.5
  Cross Slope                                                                                                   106.5                                                                                                   F106.5
  Curb Ramp                                                                                                     106.5                                                                                                   F106.5
  Facility                                                                                                      106.5                                                                                                   F106.5
  Gangway                                                                                                       106.5                                                                                                   F106.5
  Ramp                                                                                                          106.5                                                                                                   F106.5
  Running Slope                                                                                                 106.5                                                                                                   F106.5
  Transition Plate                                                                          [106.5]{style="text-align: -webkit-center;"}                                                             [F106.5]{style="text-align: -webkit-center;"}
  Â                                                                                                                Â                                                                                                         Â 
  **Recreation Boating Facilities (where provided)**                                                             235                                                                                                     F235
  Number of Accessible Boat Slips (including 40 foot rule)                                                      235.2                                                                                                   F235.2
  Boat Slip Dispersion                                                                                         235.2.1                                                                                                 F235.2.1
  Number of Acc. Boarding Piers at Boat Launch Ramps                                                            235.3                                                                                                   F235.3
  Â                                                                                                                Â                                                                                                         Â 
  **Accessible Routes (where required)**                                                                         206                                                                                                     F206
  Boating (specific provisions)                                                                               206.2.10                                                                                                 F206.2.9
  Load and Unload Areas (accessible route connection)                                                         206.2.9.1                                                                                               F206.2.9.1
  Elevators (types allowed)                                                                                     206.6                                                                                                   F206.6
  Platform Lift (new construction use)                                                                        206.7.10                                                                                                 F206.7.10
  Â                                                                                                                Â                                                                                                         Â 
  **Accessible Routes Components (typically used)**                                                               Â                                                                                                         Â 
  Curb Ramps                                                                                     [406]{style="text-align: center;"}                                                                       [406]{style="text-align: center;"}
  Doors and Gates                                                                                [404]{style="text-align: center;"}                                                                       [404]{style="text-align: center;"}
  RampsÂ (includes gangways)                                                                                      405                                                                                                      405
  Ramps (slope exception)                                                                                    1002.2 EX 1                                                                                              1002.2 EX 1
  Walking Surfaces with Running Slopes of 5% or less                                                             403                                                                                                      403
  Â                                                                                                                Â                                                                                                         Â 
  Gangway (specific alteration exception)                                                                   1003.2.1 EX 1                                                                                            1003.2.1 EX 1
  Gangway (max. rise exception)                                                                             1003.2.1 EX 2                                                                                            1003.2.1 EX 2
  Gangway (80 foot exception)                                                                               1003.2.1 EX 3                                                                                            1003.2.1 EX 3
  Gangway (25 boat slip exception)                                                                          1003.2.1 EX 4                                                                                            1003.2.1 EX 4
  Gangway (landing/transition plate exception)                                                              1003.2.1 EX 5                                                                                            1003.2.1 EX 5
  Gangway (handrail exception)                                                                              1003.2.1 EX 6                                                                                            1003.2.1 EX 6
  Gangway (cross slope exception)                                                                           1003.2.1 EX 7                                                                                            1003.2.1 EX 7
  Gangway (surface exception)                                                                               1003.2.1 EX 8                                                                                            1003.2.1 EX 8
  Â                                                                                                                Â                                                                                                         Â 
  Boarding Piers at Launch Ramps (exceptions in 1003.2.1)                                                   1003.2.2 EX 1                                                                                            1003.2.2 EX 1
  Launch Ramp (30 foot exception)                                                                           1003.2.2 EX 2                                                                                            1003.2.2 EX 2
  Launch Ramp (slope exception - floating/skid piers)                                                       1003.2.2 EX 3                                                                                            1003.2.2 EX 3
  Launch Ramp (surface exception from 1003.2.1 EX 8)                                                        1003.2.2 EX 1                                                                                            1003.2.2 EX 1
  Â                                                                                                                Â                                                                                                         Â 
  **Technical Requirements for Boating Facilities**                                                               Â                                                                                                         Â 
  Clearances (size, and 10 foot rule)                                                                        1003.3.1/.2                                                                                              1003.3.1/.2
  Clearances (boarding pier, width exception)                                                               1003.3.2 EX 1                                                                                            1003.3.2 EX 1
  Clearances (boarding pier, edge protection exception)                                                     1003.3.2 EX 2                                                                                            1003.3.2 EX 2
  Â                                                                                                                Â                                                                                                         Â 
  Clearances (boat slip, width exception)                                                                   1003.3.1 EX 1                                                                                            1003.3.1 EX 1
  Clearances (boat slip, edge protection exception)                                                         1003.2.1 EX 2                                                                                            1003.2.1 EX 2
  Clearances (boat slip, alteration exception)                                                              1003.3.1 EX 3                                                                                            1003.3.1 EX 3
  Â                                                                                                                Â                                                                                                         Â 
  Cleats and Other Boat Securement Devices (exception)                                                       205.1 EX 7                                                                                               205.1 EX 7
  Cross slope (boat slip exception)                                                                         1003.2.1 EX 7                                                                                            1003.2.1 EX 7
  Cross Slope (boarding pier exception, from 1003.2.1 EX 7)                                                 1003.2.2 EX 1                                                                                            1003.2.2 EX 1
  Â                                                                                                                Â                                                                                                         Â 
  Gas Pump (operation exception)                                                                              309.4 EX                                                                                                 309.4 EX
  Â                                                                                                                Â                                                                                                         Â 
  **Other Typical Scoping Requirements at Boat Facilities**                                                       Â                                                                                                         Â 
  Dining surfaces                                                                                [226]{style="text-align: center;"}                                                                       [F226]{style="text-align: center;"}
  Employee Work Areas (exception)                                                               [203.9]{style="text-align: center;"}                                                              [no similar exception]{style="text-align: center;"}
  Locker Rooms                                                                                                   222                                                                                                     F222
  Parking                                                                                        [208]{style="text-align: center;"}                                                                       [F208]{style="text-align: center;"}
  Passenger Loading Zones and Bus Stops                                                          [209]{style="text-align: center;"}                                                                       [F209]{style="text-align: center;"}
  Signage                                                                                        [216]{style="text-align: center;"}                                                       [F]{style="text-align: center;"}[216]{style="text-align: center;"}
  Sales and Service Counters                                                                    [227.3]{style="text-align: center;"}                                                                     F[227.3]{style="text-align: center;"}
  Toilet and Bathing                                                                                             213                                                                                                     F213
  Vending Machines                                                                                               228                                                                                                     F228
  ----------------------------------------------------------- --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

\*Â The guide uses the term ADAAG (Americans with Disabilities Act
Accessibility Guidelines) as the basis of the requirements discussed.
Â The recreational provisions of these guidelines were adopted into the
2010 ADA Standards without changes, so the ADAAG section numbers
correspond to the same section numbers in the ADA Standards (as well as
the Architectural Barriers Act (ABA) Accessibility Standards).\
\
\
:::
